Traffic Demand Prediction - Solution Architecture & Approach
Overview
This repository contains the solution for predicting urban traffic demand based on spatial, temporal, and environmental factors. The final pipeline utilizes a robust feature engineering strategy, out-of-fold spatial-temporal target encoding, and an Optuna-tuned ensemble of LightGBM and CatBoost models.
This approach successfully handles the high cardinality of geographic data and the cyclical nature of time, yielding a highly competitive R² score.


1. Feature Engineering:

The core of this solution relies on extracting meaningful patterns from the raw timestamp and geohash features.
Temporal Features
• Time Components: Extracted hour and minute from the timestamp, and calculated absolute time_in_mins (total minutes from midnight).
• Cyclical Encoding: Because time is continuous (23:59 is mathematically adjacent to 00:00), hour and time_in_mins were transformed using Sine and Cosine waves. This prevents tree-based models from incorrectly splitting late-night and early-morning hours into extreme opposites.
• Domain-Specific Flags: Created binary indicators for traffic phases:
o is_rush_am (07:00 - 09:00)
o is_rush_pm (17:00 - 19:00)
o is_biz (09:00 - 17:00)
o is_night (22:00 - 05:00)
• Weekly Cycles: Extracted day_mod7 to represent the day of the week, allowing the model to distinguish between weekday and weekend traffic patterns.
Spatial Features
• Coordinate Decoding: The geohash strings were mathematically decoded into exact continuous latitude and longitude float values, giving the tree models explicit bounding-box capabilities.
• Geohash Hierarchy: Extracted string prefixes (geo5, geo4) to create varying zoom levels of geographic grouping (neighborhood level vs. city district level).


2. Target Transformation
The distribution of the traffic demand variable is highly right-skewed. To stabilize variance and optimize the model's ability to learn, the target variable was transformed using Log1p(np.log1p(demand)).
All model training was conducted on this normalized log scale. During the final inference phase, predictions were reverted to their original scale using Expm1 (np.expm1(preds)).


3. Leak-Free Target Encoding
Because geohash has over 1,200 unique categorical values, standard label encoding is insufficient. We utilized a Spatial-Temporal Target Encoding strategy:
1. 5-Fold Cross-Validation: To prevent target leakage, the data was split into 5 folds. The mean demand for a specific geohash was calculated on 4 folds and mapped to the 5th out-of-fold (OOF) validation set.
2. Hierarchical Fallback Logic: We encoded combinations of features starting from the most granular to the most broad. If a specific combination was unseen in the training fold, it gracefully fell back to a broader average:
o Level 1 (Most Granular): [geohash, hour] mean demand.
o Level 2: [geohash] mean demand.
o Level 3: [geo5] mean demand.
o Level 4: [geo4] mean demand.
o Level 5 (Global Fallback): Overall global training mean.


4. Feature Selection
Through rigorous local cross-validation, certain features were found to introduce noise or multicollinearity. The following features were intentionally dropped from the final training set to maximize the OOF R² score:
• feat_geo4
• geo4
• day_mod7
Categorical columns such as RoadType, LargeVehicles, Landmarks, and Weather were factorized into integers to allow the models to process them natively.


5. Modeling & Ensembling
The final predictive engine is a weighted blend of two highly optimized gradient boosting models. Both models were tuned extensively using Optuna.
Model 1: LightGBM Regressor
• Strengths: Exceptionally fast, handles dense tabular data well, and captures complex feature interactions via leaf-wise growth.
• Key Hyperparameters:
o learning_rate: ~0.0289
o num_leaves: 1844 (Allowed deep, complex interactions)
o feature_fraction: ~0.82
o bagging_fraction: ~0.97
o n_estimators: 4611
Model 2: CatBoost Regressor
• Strengths: Superior native handling of categorical features and highly resistant to overfitting on specific target encodings.
• Key Hyperparameters:
o learning_rate: 0.04
o depth: 8
o iterations: 2000
The Ensemble Blend
The predictions from both models were combined using a weighted average derived from Optuna optimization:
• LightGBM Weight: ~41.8%
• CatBoost Weight: ~58.2%
6. Post-Processing
After blending the exponential predictions, two final steps were applied:
1. Heuristic Shifting: Tree models trained on log-transformed data inherently predict the median rather than the mean, leading to slight under-predictions on the extreme high end. A targeted manual shift was applied: predictions > 0.8 were adjusted by +0.06, and predictions > 0.2 were adjusted by -0.012.
2. Clipping: All final predictions were bounded np.clip(preds, 0, 1) to ensure no negative or physically impossible demand values were submitted.


7. Requirements & Reproducibility
To reproduce the pipeline, ensure the following libraries are installed:
Bash
pip install pandas numpy scikit-learn lightgbm catboost optuna matplotlib seaborn

